INVERTED HEEL HOOK GARRY TONON
Okay, so, uh as we uh continue to discuss some basic breaking mechanics, we'll move on to the inverted heel hook.
Now, I will say this about the inverted heel hook.
Okay.
This is a far more powerful submission, okay? Whether we're in a 50/50 situation, crossashi Garami, it doesn't make a difference, okay? Just by the nature of our own biology as human beings for whatever reason, okay?
It's much easier, my training partner's leg is much more pliable as he gets turned in this direction as opposed to getting turned in this direction.
All right? And it's so much easier for me to achieve breaking pressure from a position like this. Okay? Any form of my leg's coming to the inside, all right, or even outside from this situation where his leg's across my hip, all right, will be considered an inverted heel hook, okay?
Now, as far as the uh the actual mechanics are concerned, okay, placement is fairly similar, okay?
You can get away with poor mechanics in an inverted heel hook because it's so strong, even if you go armpit, elbow, and you do all of these things that I had mentioned before, okay? It's very tight, man. I could lean back a little bit and drive my hips in, and I mean, you're going to get people to tap, okay? So you're going to get some false positives sometimes.
What do I mean by false positives? Well, I'm I'm referring to a situation where like my opponent taps, and I'm like, yeah, I did it. I did a good job.
It's like, well, not necessarily. Okay? In the context of training, I'm sure there's been a ton of times where yourself and your training partners have tapped, right, when their leg wasn't going to get catastrophically broken. Maybe it hurt a little bit. Okay? And the problem is is when you transfer over into real combat, all right, whether it be a fight, whether it be a competition, whatever the case may be, and somebody is willing to take a little bit of damage, or they're willing to take a little bit more risk than they are just in a training environment. You're not going to achieve the same level of success. Either you're not going to break the person, or they're not going to tap, okay? And so now you're not achieving your desired result. You're achieving the desired result in the training room, and it looks good, it feels good, okay? But then when you go out in competition, it's not working. So, even though you're going to get these taps when you're doing things poorly, I would say try to emphasize mechanics as much as you can and practice them,
uh so that when you actually get out into competition and you put these moves on, you're going to be able to more severely break and damage your opponent, or they'd be more likely to tap, okay? So again, we can kind of do this haphazardly, but instead, let's focus on once again, trying to get toes towards the bicep, all right, and wrist underneath my training partner's heel to the best of my ability.
I don't think I mentioned this in the outside heel hook, another reason to do this is a slippage problem uh that develops when we go to try to get into these heel hook situations. If I start at the elbow, once he heel slips, there's nowhere for his heel to go.
When I start at the wrist, and I slide, he could slide down to the elbow. So I could start here, and as he's defending, yeah, maybe the heel slides down to the lower part of my forearm. It's got room to move. But if I already start there, there's no more room, so the heel slips a little bit, and he's gone.
Okay? So he could slide down if necessary. Now, preferably, we want to be up high like so, because we got that elevation of the wrist we're talking about before. Okay? So pressure on the toes, elevation of the wrist, okay, to the best of our ability in the bicep, and catching underneath the wrist like so. All right? Now, let's talk about the middle portion of the leg, okay? Like I had mentioned before, my hips and pelvis look to turn and rotate the knee just like the outside heel hook, all right, only this time in a different direction, okay?
All right, as I turn my training partner's foot, the foot gets turned in this direction, okay, towards me, okay? While the knee is going to get turned in this direction towards you guys, okay? What's very, very important, and a lot of people screw this up from an inverted heel hook situation, if we're going to get real breaking leverage, get your ass off the mat.
Okay? You really have to lift your butt and hips off the floor. When you lay on the mat, I'm not going to tell you you can't break somebody. You absolutely can. Okay? There's just not nearly as much pressure on your training partner's knee as there could be.
Okay? So I'm going to push down with my legs and lift my butt off the floor. When I do this, it allows me to impart the weight of my hips and legs to my training partner's knee.
Okay? As opposed to just kind of a slow drive here, okay, where I can kind of lightly press my hips in. Now, with my hips up off the ground, I'm really able to turn and rotate and lay weight onto my training partner's knee. So I lift, I put pressure on the toes, and watch as I kind of come up onto the knee here with my hips up in the air, and I press my hips down and into my training partner's knee.
Okay? Once again, there also has to be a connection at the end. Okay? There's got to be a connection to my training partner's hip in some way. There's a ton of different ways to do it. Something has to cross the plane of his hip.
I just can't do something like this where there's no control of the hip. Watch as his hip leaves the ground, okay? And I can't control enough to break. Okay? He has to be pinned down. That's what my legs are doing.
Okay? My hips have to leave the floor, and I have to rotate my upper body around the foot. Okay?
One other thing I'll mention, actually, we'll talk about this, we'll talk about that at the later part of the DVD. I was going to talk about head position, but we'll get to that uh when we get to more advanced uh lessons. So that's a pretty good basic overview of inverted heel hook breaking mechanics.